README.md, before:

# JoinCML

A research project to create an extension of CML with a `join` combinator.

The core of CML-style events, or alternatives, boils down to two types:

```fsharp
type Alt<'x>
type Ch<'x>
```

And a set of combinators:

```fsharp
module Ch =
  val create: unit -> Ch<'x>
  val give: Ch<'x> -> 'x -> Alt<unit>
  val take: Ch<'x> -> Alt<'x>

module Alt =
  val choice: Alt<'x> -> Alt<'x> -> Alt<'x>
  val withNack: (Alt<unit> -> Alt<'x>) -> Alt<'x>
  val afterAsync: ('x -> Async<'y>) -> Alt<'x> -> Alt<'y>
  val sync: Alt<'x> -> Async<'x>
```

The idea of
[Transactional Events](http://www.cs.rit.edu/~mtf/research/tx-events/ICFP06/icfp06.pdf)
(TE) is to extend CML-style events to a monad (with plus).  The result is a
highly expressive synchronization mechanism.

The idea of JoinCML is to extend CML-style alternatives just far enough to form
an applicative functor.  More specifically by adding a single new combinator:

```fsharp
module Alt =
  val join: Alt<'x> -> Alt<'y> -> Alt<'x * 'y>
```

Informally, the semantics is that the two given alternatives must both be
available simultaneously in order for the alternative to complete.

Using `join` one can implement the `<*>` operation of applicative functors as:

```fsharp
let (<*>) x2yA xA =
  Alt.join x2yA xA
  |> Alt.after (fun (x2y, x) ->
     x2y x)
```

Unlike TE, JoinCML essentially retains all of CML as a subset, including
negative acknowledgments and the semantics of having only a single commit point.

This project seeks to answer the following questions:

* What can JoinCML express that CML cannot express?
* What cannot JoinCML express that TE can express?
* Does JoinCML have favorable properties when compared to TE?
* Can JoinCML be implemented efficiently?

Here are some working hypotheses:

* CML ⊊ JoinCML ⊊ TE.  That is, JoinCML is strictly more expressive than CML and
  TE is strictly more expressive than JoinCML.
* JoinCML allows n-way rendezvous to be implemented for any n determined before
  the synchronization.  TE allows the n to be determined during synchronization.
  CML only allows 2-way rendezvous.
* JoinCML subsumes core
  [join-calculus](http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/fournet/papers/join-tutorial.pdf).
* JoinCML is significantly less expensive to implement than TE, because
  synchronization does not require evaluating events step-by-step during
  synchronization.
* JoinCML is better suited to impure languages than TE, because synchronization
  does not require running arbitrary code and thus there is no danger of
  performing side-effects that cannot be rolled back.

One way to gain some additional intuition is that JoinCML alternatives can be
rewritten to a [DNF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disjunctive_normal_form)-style
normal form that roughly looks like

```fsharp
(p11 <&> ...) <|> (p21 <&> ...) <|> ...
```

when we use `<|>` for `choice` and `<&>` for `join` and the `pij` are operations
on channels.  Ordinary CML doesn't have `<&>` aka `join`, so in ordinary CML the
normal form is just

```fsharp
p1 <|> p2 <|> ...
```

In both of the above, the resulting normal forms are finite.  TE does not have
such a normal form.  It is even possible to express a pair of processes using TE
that exchange messages indefinitely without completing a transaction.

At this point JoinCML is vaporware, but I definitely plan to try find an
efficient implementation.  (Of course, most of JoinCML can be trivially
implemented in TE.)

Some examples have been drafted:

* 3-way swap channel in [Swap3.fsi](Examples/Swap3.fsi) and
  [Swap3.fs](Examples/Swap3.fs).
* Dining Philosophers [Dining.fs](Examples/Dining.fs) using `MVar`s defined in
  [MVar.fsi](Examples/MVar.fsi) and [MVar.fs](Examples/MVar.fs).
* An encoding of join-calculus and translations of examples based on
  join-calculus in [Join.fs](Examples/Join.fs).

Contributions and collaborators are welcome!  In particular, if you have
interesting concurrent programming problems to solve, it would be interesting to
try to express solutions to them using JoinCML.

Commit message:

Prior work in the form of Conjoined Events found.

README.md, after:

# JoinCML

A research project to create an extension of CML with a `join` combinator.

The core of CML-style events, or alternatives, boils down to two types:

```fsharp
type Alt<'x>
type Ch<'x>
```

And a set of combinators:

```fsharp
module Ch =
  val create: unit -> Ch<'x>
  val give: Ch<'x> -> 'x -> Alt<unit>
  val take: Ch<'x> -> Alt<'x>

module Alt =
  val choice: Alt<'x> -> Alt<'x> -> Alt<'x>
  val withNack: (Alt<unit> -> Alt<'x>) -> Alt<'x>
  val afterAsync: ('x -> Async<'y>) -> Alt<'x> -> Alt<'y>
  val sync: Alt<'x> -> Async<'x>
```

The idea of
[Transactional Events](http://www.cs.rit.edu/~mtf/research/tx-events/ICFP06/icfp06.pdf)
(TE) is to extend CML-style events to a monad (with plus).  The result is a
highly expressive synchronization mechanism.

The idea of JoinCML is to extend CML-style alternatives just far enough to form
an applicative functor.  More specifically by adding a single new combinator:

```fsharp
module Alt =
  val join: Alt<'x> -> Alt<'y> -> Alt<'x * 'y>
```

Informally, the semantics is that the two given alternatives must both be
available simultaneously in order for the alternative to complete.

Using `join` one can implement the `<*>` operation of applicative functors as:

```fsharp
let (<*>) x2yA xA =
  Alt.join x2yA xA
  |> Alt.after (fun (x2y, x) ->
     x2y x)
```

Unlike TE, JoinCML essentially retains all of CML as a subset, including
negative acknowledgments and the semantics of having only a single commit point.

Unsurprisingly, it appears that basically the same idea has already been
discovered earlier in the form of
[Conjoined Events](https://kar.kent.ac.uk/33878/1/Conjoined.pdf).  Thanks to
Matthew Fluet for finding the paper!

This project seeks to answer the following questions:

* What can JoinCML express that CML cannot express?
* What cannot JoinCML express that TE can express?
* Does JoinCML have favorable properties when compared to TE?
* Can JoinCML be implemented efficiently?

Here are some working hypotheses:

* CML ⊊ JoinCML ⊊ TE.  That is, JoinCML is strictly more expressive than CML and
  TE is strictly more expressive than JoinCML.
* JoinCML allows n-way rendezvous to be implemented for any n determined before
  the synchronization.  TE allows the n to be determined during synchronization.
  CML only allows 2-way rendezvous.
* JoinCML subsumes core
  [join-calculus](http://research.microsoft.com/en-us/um/people/fournet/papers/join-tutorial.pdf).
* JoinCML is significantly less expensive to implement than TE, because
  synchronization does not require evaluating events step-by-step during
  synchronization.
* JoinCML is better suited to impure languages than TE, because synchronization
  does not require running arbitrary code and thus there is no danger of
  performing side-effects that cannot be rolled back.

One way to gain some additional intuition is that JoinCML alternatives can be
rewritten to a [DNF](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Disjunctive_normal_form)-style
normal form that roughly looks like

```fsharp
(p11 <&> ...) <|> (p21 <&> ...) <|> ...
```

when we use `<|>` for `choice` and `<&>` for `join` and the `pij` are operations
on channels.  Ordinary CML doesn't have `<&>` aka `join`, so in ordinary CML the
normal form is just

```fsharp
p1 <|> p2 <|> ...
```

In both of the above, the resulting normal forms are finite.  TE does not have
such a normal form.  It is even possible to express a pair of processes using TE
that exchange messages indefinitely without completing a transaction.

At this point JoinCML is vaporware, but I definitely plan to try find an
efficient implementation.  (Of course, most of JoinCML can be trivially
implemented in TE.)

Some examples have been drafted:

* 3-way swap channel in [Swap3.fsi](Examples/Swap3.fsi) and
  [Swap3.fs](Examples/Swap3.fs).
* Dining Philosophers [Dining.fs](Examples/Dining.fs) using `MVar`s defined in
  [MVar.fsi](Examples/MVar.fsi) and [MVar.fs](Examples/MVar.fs).
* An encoding of join-calculus and translations of examples based on
  join-calculus in [Join.fs](Examples/Join.fs).

Contributions and collaborators are welcome!  In particular, if you have
interesting concurrent programming problems to solve, it would be interesting to
try to express solutions to them using JoinCML.
